Okay, today I'm chatting with Terrance
Tao, who needs no introduction.
Terrance, I want to begin by having you
retell the story of how Kepler
discovered the laws of planetary motion,
because I think this will be a great
jumping off point to talk about AI for
math. Okay, yeah. So, I've always had an
amateur interest in astronomy, and so
I've I've loved stories of how the early
astronomers worked out
the nature of the universe. Um
So, Kepler was building on the work of
Copernicus,
who was himself building on the work of
Aristarchus.
So, Copernicus very famously proposed
the heliocentric model, that instead of
the planets and sun going around the
Earth, that the sun was at the center of
the solar system, and the other planets
were going around the sun. And
Copernicus proposed that the orbits of
the planets were perfect circles. And
his theory kind of fit the observations
that
the the Greeks and the Arabs and the
Indians had worked out over over
centuries. Um
I think
Kepler got interested
like he learned about these these
theories in his in his studies, and he
made his observation that the ratios of
the size of the orbits that Copernicus
predicted seemed to have some geometric
meaning. I think
yeah, he he started proposing that you
know, if you if you take say the orbit
of
say the Earth and you enclose it in I
think maybe a cube, um the the outer
sphere of that that encloses the cube
almost match perfectly the orbit of
Mars, and so forth. Um And there were
six planets known at the time, five gaps
between them, and it five perfect
platonic solids, the cube, the
tetrahedron, icosahedron, octahedron,
and dodecahedron. And so, he had this
this theory which he thought was
absolutely beautiful, that you could
inscribe these platonic solids between
the spheres of the planets, and it
seemed to fit. And
it seemed to be to him like you know,
God's design of the planets was was
matching this mathematical perfection of
the platonic solids.
So, he needed data to confirm this
theory. And at the time there was only
one really high-quality data set um
it come almost into existence, okay,
which was the So, Tycho Brahe, a Danish
astronomer, very wealthy, eccentric
astronomer, had managed to convince the
Danish government to fund this
extremely expensive observatory, this in
fact an entire island, um where he had
taken decades of observations of all the
planets, Mars, Jupiter,
every night at least every night for
which the weather was clear.
With the naked eye, actually. This is he
was last of the of the naked eye
astronomers.
And so, he had all this data which
Kepler could use to confirm his theory.
And so, Kepler started working with with
Tycho, but Tycho was very jealous of the
data. He only gave little bit bits of it
at a time. Um and I think Kepler
eventually just stole the data. He He
copied it and and had to have a fight
with with
Brahe's descendants. Um but he did work
out he took the data and then he worked
out to kind of his disappointment that
his beautiful theory didn't quite work.
Like the data was sort of off from his
platonic solid theory by you know, about
10% or something. And he tried all kinds
of fudges, moving the circles around and
things, and it it it it didn't quite
work.
But he worked on this problem for for
for years and years, and eventually he
figured out how to use the data to to
work out the actual orbits of
of the planets,
and that was incredibly clever genius
amount of data analysis.
And yeah, and then he eventually worked
out that the
the orbits were actually ellipses, not
circles, which was shocking to him. And
then he worked out
so, he worked out the two laws of
planetary two laws of planetary motion,
the ellipses also equal areas swept out
equal times. Um
And then 10 years later, after
collecting a lot of data, that the the
the furthest planets like like Saturn
and Jupiter were the hardest for him to
to work out, but then he he finally
worked out this third law also, that uh
um
that the the orbits the the the the time
it takes for a planet to complete its
orbit was proportional to some power of
of the distance to the sun. And these
are the three famous Kepler's laws of
motion,
and he had no explanation for them. It
it it was just all driven by by
experiment, and it took Newton a century
later to give a theory that explained
all three laws at once.
The
take I want to try on you is that Kepler
was a high-temperature LLM.
>> [laughter]
>> Where Newton comes up with this
explanation of why the three laws of
planetary motion must be true. And of
course, the way that Kepler discovers
the laws of planetary motion or
figures out the relative orbits of the
different planets is as you say, a work
of genius. But then you know, he's
through his career, he's just trying
random relationships. And in fact, at
the in the book in which he writes down
the third law of planetary motion, it's
sort of
on the side on the harmonics of the
world, which is this book about, you
know, all these different planets have
these different harmonies, and the
reason there's so much famine and misery
on Earth is because the Earth is
me-fa-me, that's the note of Earth. And
so, all this random astrology, but it in
there is the cube-square law, which
tells you what relationship the
the period has to a planet's distance
from the sun, which is as you were
detailing,
if you add that to Newton's F equals MA
and then the equation for centripetal
acceleration, you get the inverse square
law.
And so, Newton works that out, but the
reason I um I think this is an
interesting story
is I feel like LLMs could do the kind of
thing of like 20 years, let's try random
relationships, some of which make no
sense, as long as there's a verifiable
data bank like Brahe's data set, where
okay, I'm going to try out random things
about like musical notes. I'm going to
try out random things about platonic
objects. I'm going to all these
different geometries. I have this bias
that there's some important thing about
the geometry of these orbits, and then
one thing works. And as long as you can
verify it, it can then drive these
empirical regularities can then drive
actual deep scientific progress.
Traditionally, when we talk about the
history of science,
idea generation has always been kind of
the prestige part of science. So, I
mean, a scientific problem comes with
there's many steps, you know, you you
have to identify a problem, and then you
have to identify a good problem to work
on, a fruitful problem.
And then you need to to collect data,
you need to figure out a strategy to
analyze the data, to make a hypothesis.
And at this point, you need to propose a
good hypothesis, and then you need to
validate. So, yeah, so there's and then
need to write things up and explain.
There's this there's there's
a dozen different components. Um but
yeah, the the ones we celebrate these
sort of eureka genius moments of of idea
generation. Um
And
yeah, so so Kepler certainly had to to
as you say, cycle through many ideas,
and and several which didn't work, and
and I I bet many that he didn't even
publish at all, because yeah, they they
they just didn't fit. And that's an
important part of the process,
trying all kinds of of of random things
and seeing if they worked. Um But as you
say, the
you know, the it had to be matched by an
equal amount of verification, otherwise
it's it's slop. I mean, um
we we celebrate Kepler, but we should
also celebrate Brahe for for his his his
assiduous data collection, which was 10
times more precise than than any
previous observation. And it
that extra decimal point of accuracy was
actually essential for Kepler to get his
his results. Um And you know, and he was
using you know, Euclidean geometry and
and and like like the most advanced
mathematics he could
use at the time to to match his
models to the data. So, like all aspects
had to be in play, you know, the the the
data and the theory and the the
hypothesis generation.
I'm not sure nowadays that hypothesis
generation is the bottleneck anymore. Um
Science has changed in in in the century
since. So,
classically, sort of the the two big
paradigms for for for science were
theory and experiment.
Um And then in the 20th century,
numerical simulation came along. And so,
we can also do computer simulations of
of of of to test theories.
But then finally, in the late 20th
century, we had big data. Now, we we had
the the the era of data analysis.
And so, a lot of new progress is
actually driven now by analyzing massive
data sets first, collecting large data
sets, and then drawing the patterns from
them to deduce laws, which is a little
bit different from how science used to
work, where you you make a few
observations, or you just have one out
of the blue idea,
and then you collect data to test your
idea. That's the classic scientific
method.
Now, it's almost reversed. You collect
big data first, and then you you try to
to get hypotheses from it. Um
I mean, Kepler was maybe one of the
first early data scientists, but but
even even he didn't start with Ty-
Tycho's data set and and analyze it. He
had He had some preconceived theories
first.
But it's it seems like this is less and
less the way we make progress in in in
just because
yeah, the data is is just so much more
massive, it's just so much more useful.
Oh, interesting. I I
actually feel like the more the 20th
century science that you're describing
is actually very well describes what
happened with Kepler, where he did have
these ideas
um 1595 and '96 is where he comes up
with first polygons and then platonic
objects theory. But they were wrong. And
then a few years later, he gets Brahe's
data, and it's only after 20 years of
just trying random things that he gets
this empirical regularity. And so, it
actually feels a closer to Brahe's data
is analogous to
some massive data bank of simulations,
and then we he now he now that you've
got the data, you can keep trying random
things. But if it wasn't, Kepler would
be out there just writing books about
harmonics and the platonic objects, and
there would be nothing to actually
verify against.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, the
the data was extremely important, but
the distinction I'm trying to make is
that sort of traditionally, you make a
hypothesis, and then you test it against
data. Um But
now with machine learning and data
analysis and statistics, and so on, you
you can you can start with data, and um
through say statistics, work out,
laws that
were not present before. So, and so
Kepler's so Kepler's third law is a
little bit like this, except that for
the third law, instead of having the
thousand data points that Brahe had,
Kepler had like six data points to like
every planet you need the length of the
orbit and the the distance to the sun
and there was like five or six data
points and he did what we would now call
regression. You know, he he could fit a
curve to these six data points and he
got a square cube law, which was
amazing,
but actually he was quite lucky. I mean,
that these six data points gave him the
right conclusion. Um
you know, it's that's not enough data to
be really reliable. Um
There was a later astronomer, Johannes
Bode,
who took the same the same data,
actually, the the distances to to the
planets and inspired by Kepler, I think
he had a prediction that the the the the
distances to the planets formed
basically a shifted geometric
progression. He also fit a curve.
Except there was there was one there was
one point missing. So, there was a big
gap between Mars and Jupiter.
His law predicted that there was a
missing planet. It was a kind of a a
crank theory, except when Uranus was
discovered by Herschel,
the the distance to Uranus fit exactly
this this pattern.
And then Ceres was discovered, this
asteroid between
I think in the asteroid belt and it also
fit the pattern. So, people got really
excited that that that that that Bode
had discovered this this amazing new law
of nature,
but then Neptune was discovered and it
was completely like way off
and you know, and and basically it was
just a numerical fluke. You know, there
was
six data points.
Um
Yeah, so maybe one reason why Kepler
didn't highlight his third law as much
as the first two laws is that maybe
instinctively, even though he didn't
have modern statistics, he kind of knew
that with six data points he had to be
somewhat tentative
with the conclusions. But maybe to
ask the
question about the analogy more
explicitly.
Does this analogy make sense to if we
have you know, in the future we'll have
smarter and smarter AIs and we'll have
millions of them.
And then they can go out and hunt for
all these empirical regularities.
It sounds like you don't think the
bottleneck in science is
finding more things that are for each
given field their equivalent of the
third law of planetary motion so that
then later on somebody can say, oh, we
need a way to explain this. Let's work
out the math. Here here is the inverse
square law of gravity. Right. So, I
think AI has basically driven the cost
of idea generation down to almost zero
in a very similar way to how the
internet drove the cost of communication
down to almost zero,
which is an amazing thing, but it you
know, it it it doesn't make it doesn't
create abundance by itself.
Yeah, so now the bottleneck is is
different.
So, we're now in a situation where
suddenly people can generate thousands
of theories for
a given
scientific problem. And now we have to
to verify them, evaluate them and this
is something which we we have to to
change our structures of science to
actually sort this out. So, you know, in
fact, traditionally we we built walls,
you know, so in in the past, you know,
before we had AI slop, you know, we we
had sort of amateur scientists, you
know, create you know, have their own
theories of the universe, many of which
um
were basically of very little value.
And so we built these like, you know,
peer review publication systems and
things to kind of filter out and try to
to isolate the high signal um
ideas to to test, but but now that we
can generate these these these these
possible explanations at massive scale
and some of them are good and a lot are
terrible. Um
I mean, there's human reviewers we just
it's just
they're already being overwhelmed,
actually.
Many many journals are reporting AI
generated submissions are just are just
are just flooding their submissions. So,
it's great that we can generate all
kinds of things now with AI, but it it
means that we have to the rest of the
rest of the aspects of science have to
catch up. Yeah, so verification,
validation
and and assessing
what ideas actually move the subject
forward and and what which ones are dead
ends or or or red herrings and that's
that's not something where we've we know
how to do at scale.
You know, for each individual paper we
can discuss it with, you know, have a
debate among scientists and get to a
consensus in a few years, but when we're
generating, you know, a thousand of
these every day, yeah, this doesn't
work. So, I think there is this
incredibly interesting question of we
have billions of AI scientists.
Not only how do you gauge which ones are
real progress, but how do you I mean,
this is actually a question that human
scientists had to face and we've solved
somehow and I'm I actually I'm not sure
how we solved this, but
in any given field
let's say in the 1940s and there's if
you're at Bell Labs or if you're just
generally trying to these these new
technologies coming out
pulse code modulation, basically how do
you transfer signals, how do you
digitize signals, how do you transfer
them over analog wires? And then but
there's like all these papers about the
engineering constraints there and the
details and then there's one which is
like comes up with the idea of the bit,
which has implications across many
different fields and you need some
system which can then look at that and
say, okay, we need to apply this to
probability, we need to apply this to
computer science, etc.
For in the future the AIs are coming up
with, you know, the next version of this
kind of unifying concept and how would
you identify it among millions of papers
which might actually constitute
progress, but which have much less
general unifying ideas. A lot of it is
the test of time. So, so many great
ideas didn't actually get a great
reception at the time that they were
first proposed. It was only after some
other scientists
realized that that that they could take
it further and apply them to their own.
Deep learning itself was actually a
niche area of AI for a long time. The
idea of of getting answers entirely
through training on data and and not
through first principles you know,
reasoning was was was very controversial
and they would just took a long time
before it actually started
bearing fruit.
You know, you mentioned the bit, you
know, I mean, there were there were
other proposals for computer
architectures than the zero one that is
universal today. I think there there
were there were trits, you know, zero
one
three valued logic and
you know, in an alternate universe maybe
a different paradigm would have would
have showed up.
People have argued that, you know, the
the transformer, for example, is is the
foundation of all modern large language
models and it was the first
deep learning architecture that really
was was sophisticated enough to capture
language, but it didn't have to be that
way. There there could have been some
other architecture that um
was the first to do it and
once that was adopted it would become
the standard. Um so, I think
one reason why it's hard to assess
whether a given idea is going to be
fruitful is that it it depends on the
future. It it depends on and it it
depends on also on the culture and
society like like which ones get
adopted, which ones don't. Um
You know, the base 10
numeral system in mathematics extremely
useful, much better than the Roman
numeral system, for instance. Um but
again, there's nothing special about 10.
It's it's a system that we it's useful
for us because everyone else uses it
and we've standardized it and we've
built all our
computers and our and our number
representation systems around it and so
we're stuck with it now, actually. You
know, people are some people
occasionally push for other systems than
decimal, but um it's there's there's no
there's no
there's too much inertia.
So,
you you can't look at any given
scientific achievement purely in
isolation and give it an objective grade
without
being aware of the context both in the
the past and the future.
And so it it it may never be something
that you can just reinforcement learn
the same way that
that you can for much sort of more
localized problems.
Yeah.
It seems often in the history of science
when what when a new theory comes up
that in retrospect we realize is
correct, it seems to make implications
that just either make no sense because
they're wrong and we realize later on
why they're wrong or they're correct,
but seem wildly impossible at the time.
So, in as you talked about, Aristarchus
had heliocentrism in the third century
BC and then um
the ancient Athenians were like, this
can't be because it wouldn't if the
Earth is going around the sun, we should
see the relative position of the stars
change as we're going around the sun and
the only way that wouldn't be the case
is if they're so far away that
that you don't notice any parallax,
which is actually the correct
implication. But there's times when the
actually the implication is incorrect
and we just need to graduate to a better
level of understanding. So, Leibniz
would
you know, chide Newton and disagree with
Newton's theory of gravity on the basis
that it implied action at a distance
and then there's we don't know the
mechanism and
Newton himself was sort of stunned that
inertial mass and gravitational mass
were the same quantity. So, all these
things were later to be resolved by
Einstein.
>> Yes, yes. But it was still progress. And
so
the question for a system of peer review
for AI would be even if you can falsify
a theory, how would you notice that it
still constitutes progress relative to
things before? Yeah, so it
often actually the the ultimately
correct theory initially is is worse in
many ways. Yeah, so Copernicus's theory
of of the planets, it was less accurate
than Ptolemy's theory. Yeah, so so
geocentrism had been developed for for
you know,
a millennium by that point and they had
they had many many many tweaks and and
had very increasingly complicated ad hoc
fixes to to make it more and more
accurate
and Copernicus's theory was a lot
simpler, but but much less accurate. It
was only Kepler that made it more
accurate than Ptolemy's theory. I mean,
science is always a work in progress.
You know, so yeah, so when you only get
part of of the solution, it it looks
worse than than
theory which is incorrect, but somehow
if you if has been completed to the
point where it it it kind of answers all
the questions.
Um
As you say,
you know, Newton's theory had
had big mysteries,
the equivalence of mass and action at a
distance, which were
only resolved with a very conceptually
different
approach
centuries afterwards.
Um
progress has been made actually not by
adding more theories but by deleting
some assumptions that you you have in in
in in your mind. So, um,
you know, one reason why geocentrism
held on for so long is is we we had this
idea that that objects, um, naturally
want to stay at rest. This is the
Aristotelian notion of physics. And so,
the idea that the Earth was moving, you
know, how can we not all sort of all
falling over?
You know, once you have Newton's laws of
motion, you know, object in motion
remains in motion and so forth, then
then then it it makes sense. But, um,
you had to so conceptually, it it's it's
a very big conceptual leap to to realize
that that that the Earth is is in
motion. It doesn't feel like it's in
motion. Um,
and like the biggest advances, you know,
Darwin's uh theory of evolution, you
know, is um
the the idea that that species are are
not static. Um, but you know, it's it's
not obvious cuz you you you don't see
evolution in in in your lifetime. Uh
well, now we can actually can, but um
but um but um
you know, it's it's it's it it seems it
seems permanent uh and static.
Um,
you know, right now we're going through
uh an in um an cognitive version of the
Copernican revolution where we used to
think that human intelligence is the
center of the universe. And now we're
actually seeing that there's there's
very different types of intelligence um
that that that are out there uh with
very different strengths and weaknesses.
Um, and so,
um our assess- assessment of which tasks
require intelligence and which ones
don't, um, has to be um re- re-evaluated
um and so, you know, it's it's trying to
fit AI into sort of our theories of
scientific progress and and and and what
is hard and what is easy. Um, we're
struggling quite a lot. Uh we have to
ask questions that we've never really
had to ask before. Or or maybe the
philosophers had, but now we all have to
deal with it. That this actually
brings up a topic I've I've been very
curious about. So, you mentioned
Darwin's theory of evolution.
There's this book The Clockwork Universe
by Edward Dolnick which covers a lot of
this era of history we're talking about.
And he [clears throat] has this
interesting observation in there that um
Origin of Species is published in 1859.
The Principia Mathematica is published
in 1687.
So, The Origin of Species comes out
basically two centuries after the
Principia. And conceptually it seems
like Darwin's theory is simpler. Um,
there's a contemporaneous biologist to
Darwin who reads The Origin of Species,
Thomas Huxley, and he says,
"How stupid not to have thought of
that?" And nobody ever says that about
Principia. They're chiding themselves
for not having beaten Newton to
um to gravity. And so, there's a
question of, "Well, why did it take
longer?" It seems like a a big part of
the reason is that the evidence for
natural selection is cumulative and
retrospective, whereas Newton can just
like
here's here's my equations. Let me see
the moon's orbital period and its uh
distance.
If it lines up, then we've made
progress. And so, Lucretius actually had
the idea this idea that species adapt to
their environment in the 1st century BC,
but nobody ever like really talks about
it until Darwin because there's
Lucretius can't run some experiment and
people are like forced to pay attention.
And so, I wonder if we'll in retrospect
end up seeing much more progress in
domains which are
have this kind of tight data loop where
you can verify them quite uh easily even
though they're conceptually much more
difficult. I think one one aspect of
science is it's it's not just it
creating new theory and validating it,
um, but communicating it to others. Uh
so, so Darwin was actually an amazing
science communicator. Um, he he uh he
wrote in English in natural uh natural
language. I'm speaking like
>> [laughter]
>> in um
uh in no lean.
Okay, my my yeah, okay. Um, I have to
have to sort of
get out of my my technical mindset.
Yeah, okay. He spoke in plain English.
Um,
you know, didn't use equations.
And he he synthesized a lot of um you
know, disparate facts. Yeah, so, you
know, little pieces of evolution had
been worked out in the past, but he had
this very compelling um
vision. And and again, still missing
things like he didn't know the mechanism
for for for for hereditary.
Uh he didn't know DNA. Okay, and um
yeah, but uh his writing style was
persuasive and that that helped a lot.
Um, Newton wrote in Latin. Um, yeah, he
he he he had to do it invented, you
know, entire new areas of mathematics
just to explain what he was doing. Um,
he was also from an era which was where
scientists were much more secretive and
competitive. Um, so, you know, academia
is still competitive, but it was even
worse
back in Newton's day. Um, so, he he held
back some of his best insights because
he didn't want his rivals to get any
advantage. Um,
he was also like a somewhat unpleasant
person from what I what I what I
gathered actually. Um,
so, um it was actually only a couple
decades after Newton where other
scientists explained his work in much
simpler terms that they became um
widespread.
Um,
so, um yeah, the the the the art of
exposition and making a case and
creating a narrative, um,
is uh is also a very important part of
science. Um, and um
if you have the data and the it helps,
but but people need to be convinced.
Otherwise, they will not push it further
or they will not take initial investment
to uh to to learn your theory and really
and really explore it.
Um,
and that's another thing which is really
hard to reinforce on learning. Uh yeah,
how how can you score how persuasive you
are? Okay, well, okay, there's the
entire marketing departments who are
trying to do this. So, maybe it's good
that AI are not yet optimized to be
uh persuasive.
So, yeah, there's there's there's
there's there's a social aspect to
science.
You
even though we pride ourselves on having
an objective um side to it where there's
data and there's experiment and
validation. Um, we we still have to tell
stories and convince our fellow
scientists. Um,
and that's a
a soft squishy thing like it it's, you
know, it's it's a combination of data
and
um
yeah, and
uh painting a narrative and and it's
been out of the gaps, you know, I mean,
as you know, so
so even Darwin said there were there
were pieces of his theory he could not
explain.
But, he could still make a case that,
you know, in the future people would uh
would would would find transitional
forms, that they would find the
mechanism of inheritance, and they did.
Yeah, um I don't know how you can
quantify that in such a precise way that
that you can start to reinforce on
learning.
Um, maybe that will be forever the human
side of science.
One
takeaway I had from uh reading and
watching yourself on the Cosmic Distance
Ladder. By the way, I I highly highly
highly recommend people watch your
series with Through the Wormhole on the
Cosmic Distance Ladder. But, um
one takeaway was that the deductive
overhang
in many fields could be so much bigger
than people realize where if if you
[snorts] just had the right insight
about how to study a problem,
you might be surprised at how much more
you could learn about the world. And I
wonder if you think that's sort of a
product of astronomy at the particular
times in history that you're studying or
is this that based on the data that is
incident on the Earth right now, we
could actually divine a lot more than we
happen to know? All right. So, astronomy
was one of the first sciences to really
embrace data analysis and and and
squeezing every last possible drop of
information out of information that I
had because because data was the
bottleneck. Um, I mean, it still is a
bottleneck. I mean, it's it's really
hard to to collect astronomical data.
So, astronomers are the best or you
know,
almost
world-class in in extracting, you know,
almost like Sherlock, you know, so they
like extracting all kinds of conclusions
from little traces of data.
Um, I hear that that a lot of quant
hedge funds they they they preferred
hires in astronomy PhD.
That they also are very interested for
other reasons in extracting signals from
from from various random bits of data.
Okay, speaking of clever ideas, one of
my listeners, Shawn, solved the puzzle
that Jane Street made for my audience
and posted a great walk-through on X.
For context, Jane Street trained a
ResNet and then shuffled all 96 layers
and then challenged people to put them
back in the right order using only the
model's outputs and training data. You
can't brute force this. There's more
possible orderings than atoms in the
universe. So, Shawn broke the problem
into two different parts. First, pair
the layers into 48 different blocks. And
second, put those blocks in the right
order. For pairing, Shawn realized that
in a well-trained ResNet, the product of
two weight matrices in a residual block
should have a distinctive negative
diagonal pattern. And this arises as a
way for the model to keep the residual
stream from growing out of control. From
this insight, he was able to recover the
right pairings. For ordering, Shawn
noticed that the model seemed to improve
if he sorted the blocks by the size of
their residual contributions. Starting
with a rough approximation, he combined
a clever ranking heuristic with local
swaps to recover the exact right order.
His full walk-through is linked in the
description. Don't worry if you didn't
get to this puzzle in time, though.
There's still one up about backdoor DLLs
that even Jane Street doesn't know how
to solve. You can find it at
janestreet.com/twarkash.
All right, back to Terrence.
We we we do under explore sort of um how
to extract extra information from from
various signals. Um,
like um
um I would I just to put to to pick one
random study. I I remember reading once
that that people had discovered or
trying to to measure how often um
scientists actually read the citations
um that the papers that they cite. Uh
so, how how do you measure this? Okay,
you you um you you could try to survey
um
different scientists, but they they they
had some clever um
trick. So, so
um so, many citations have little typos
like like a like, you know, the a number
is wrong or or punctuation is almost
wrong. And they they measured how often
a a typo got copied from one reference
to to the next and and they could infer
whether an author was actually just
copying it cutting and pasting a
reference without actually checking it.
Um, and so, from that they they were
able to infer some some measure of of
sort of
how much attention people were paying.
Uh so,
there are also clever tricks to extract
um
you know, so these questions you posed
earlier of you know, how can we assess
whether um
a scientific development is fruitful or
uh or interesting or or represents real
progress, you know, maybe there are um
really useful metrics and or or um
footprints of this of this of this um
of of this phenomenon in in a data data
set, you know, we can we can examine
citations and um and like how often
something is mentioned in a conference
or something and and maybe that there
there's there's there's a lot of uh
social sociology of science research to
be to be done and and that could
actually um detect these things. Um
yeah, maybe we you should get some
astronomers on the case actually.
Um
Okay, so I I think this is really
interesting uh nicely to
the progress that from the outside it
seems like AI for math is making. And I
think your post recently reported out
that over the last few months
AI programs have solved 50 out of the
1,100 odd Erdos problems, but then I
think I don't know if it's still
correct, but as of a month ago you said
that there had been a pause because the
low-hanging fruit had been picked.
First of all, I'm I'm curious if
actually that is still the case that
we have picked the low-hanging fruit and
now we're at now we're at this plateau
currently. It it does seem so. I mean,
there's still activity at the Yeah, so
so 50 odd problems have been solved with
AI assistance, which is great, but
there's like 600 to go. Um
and people are still chipping away at
one or two of these right now.
Um
we are seeing a lot fewer sort of pure
AI solutions now where um they are just
one shots the problem. Um so so there
was there was a month where that
happened and and that has stopped. Um
not for lack of trying. I know three
separate uh uh attempts to get frontier
model AIs to just attack every single
one of the problems somewhat aimlessly.
Um
And they pick up some minor observations
or maybe they they they found that some
problems are already solved in the
literature, but there hasn't been any
further AI purely powered yet. Um people
are using AI a lot um uh
currently. Yeah, so someone might use AI
to generate a a possible um proof
strategy and then it's another person
using a separate AI tool to critique it
um
uh or rewrite it uh or generate some
numerical data for it or do a literature
survey. Um
And and some problems have been solved
by a a ongoing conversation between lots
of humans and lots of AI tools.
Um but uh it it it does seem like it was
this this one-off thing.
So maybe one analogy to to for these
problems is like um imagine like um this
this there's all these that you're in
some sort of mountain range with all
kinds of of cliffs and walls and and uh
maybe there's a there's a there's a
little um uh wall which is maybe like 3
ft high and one that's 6 ft high and
then there's 15 ft high and then there's
there's a there's a mile-high cliffs.
Um
And you try to climb as many of these
cliffs as possible. But it's in the
dark. Uh we don't know which ones are
are tall which ones are short. And um so
you know, we try to light some candles
and make some maps and and slowly we we
kind of figure out uh some of them are
are climbable. Some of them we can
identify some some partial um um crack
in the wall that you can reach first. Um
And then these these AI tools, they're
kind of like these jumping machines that
can kind of jump, you know, 2 m in the
air, you know, higher than the any
human. And sometimes they jump in the
wrong direction and sometimes they they
crash, but sometimes they they they can
reach um um the tops of of of the lowest
um you know, um
uh walls that we we couldn't reach
before.
And so we just basically sit them loose
in this mountain range hopping around
and you know, and then there's this
exciting period where they they could
actually find all the um all the low
ones um and they they could reach them.
Um
But then uh there's been no
Yeah, I mean maybe if the next time
there's a big advance in the models,
then they will try it again and maybe a
a few more will be will be uh
will be breached. Um But it it it's a
different style of doing mathematics
than um sort of the you know, so
normally we would hill climb and you
know, we would we would make little
markers and and and and try to identify
partial things and um you know, these
tools they either succeed or they fail
um
and they they've been really bad at
creating sort of partial progress or
identifying intermediate um
um
stages that you should you should focus
on first. Um again, going back to to
this this previous discussion, you know,
we don't have a way of evaluating
partial progress. Um the thing the thing
where we could we can evaluate a
one-shot success or failure of solving a
problem. So there's two different ways
to um think through what you've just
said and one of them is more bearish on
AI progress and one of them is more
bullish. And bearish on being, oh,
they're only getting to a certain height
of wall, which is not as high as humans
are reaching. Um And the second is that
well, they have this powerful property
that once they achieve a certain
waterline, they can fill every single
problem that is available at that
waterline, which we simply can't do with
humans where we can't make copies of you
and uh give each of them a million
dollars of inference compute and have
you do 100 years of subjective time
research on um 100 different problems at
the same time or a million different
problems at the same time. But once AIs
reach Terence Tao level, they could do
that. Um
And then once they reach intermediate
levels, they could do they could do the
intermediate version of that. So
the same reason that we should be
bearish now is the reason we should be
especially bullish, not even when they
achieve superhuman intelligence, but
just when they achieve human-level
intelligence because their human-level
intelligence is qualitatively wider and
more powerful than our human-level
intelligence. I I I agree. Yeah, so they
excel at breadth and humans excel at
depth. Um like human experts at least.
Yeah, so um I think they're very
complementary. Um
but our current uh way of doing math and
science is focused on depth because that
that's where the human uh expertise cuz
humans can't do breadth. Um
But uh
yeah, so we have we have to redesign uh
the way we do science to take full
advantage of of this breadth capability
that we now have.
Um so as I said, we do
we should have a lot more effort in
creating very broad class of problems to
work on rather than than one or two
really um deep important problems. I
mean, we should still have the deep
important problems
um and humans should still be working on
them.
Um but but now we now we we have this
other way of of of of doing um of doing
science, you know, I mean,
uh we can explore entire new fields of
science by by first getting the these
broad um moderately competent AIs to
sort of map it out and clear out all the
the easy make all the easy observations
and and then identify certain islands of
difficulty uh which you know, then human
experts can come and and and work on. So
I I see I see very much
a future of very complementary um
um sides.
Eventually, you would hope to get both
breadth and depth, you know, and and
somehow get the best best of both best
of both worlds. Um but I think we we
need practice with the breadth side
because it's too new. Uh we don't even
have the paradigms really to to um
to make full advantage of it. But we
will um and then science will be
unrecognizable after that.
To to this point about complementarity,
the
programmers have noticed that they're
way more productive as a result of these
AI tools.
And um I don't know if you as a
mathematician feel the same way, but it
does seem like one big difference
between vibe coding and vibe researching
is that with software,
the whole point of the thing is to have
some effect on the world through your
work. And if it leads to you better
understanding a problem or you coming up
with some clean abstraction to embody in
your code, that is instrumental to the
end goal. Whereas maybe with research,
the reason we care about solving the
Millennium Prize problems is presumably
that in the process of solving them, our
we discover new mathematical objects or
better
new techniques and those who understand
our civilization's understanding of
mathematics. And so the proof is sort of
instrumental to the intermediate
uh work.
I don't know if you agree with that
dichotomy or if that in any way will
explain the relative uplift we'll see in
software versus research. Right. Um
yeah, so so certainly in in math the
process is is often more important than
the problem itself. Um the problem is
kind of a proxy for for measuring the
progress. I think even in software
there's there's there's different types
of software tasks. I mean, there you
know, like if you just kind of create a
web page that does the same thing that a
thousand other web pages
do. Um
There's there's sort of no skill to be
learned. Well, um
um there is there is still some skill
maybe that the individual programmer
could pick up. Um but you know, for for
the kind of boilerplate type code,
definitely um
um you know, it's it's it's it's
something that you could definitely
offload offload to AI. Um
um
But you know, sometimes once you make
the code, you know, you still have to
maintain it and and and and and there's
issues with upgrading it and making
compatible with other things and and
that um I think um
I feel that that programmers are
reporting, you know, that even if if if
an AI can create the first prototype of
of a
um of a tool, making it mesh with
everything else and and making it
interact with the real world in the way
they want, I mean, it's that's an
ongoing process. And if you didn't have
the [clears throat] um the skills of
that you pick up from from um from
writing the code, um that may that may
impact uh your ability to maintain it
down the road.
Um
So certainly um
mathematicians, you know, we've we've
used problems to
build intuition and and to to train
people to to have a good idea as as
what's true, what what to expect, what
is what is provable, what is what is
difficult.
Um and so yeah, just getting the answers
right away may actually yeah, inhibit
that process. Um
I mean, so
as um
I made distinction between theory and
experiment before. Um so um
In most sciences, there's an equal
division between there's a theoretical
side and experimental side. Um
But in math has been almost unique is
that it's almost entirely theoretical.
Uh we we we uh
um we place a premium on sort of trying
to to to have coherent clean theories of
of of why things are true and and and
false.
And we haven't done much experiments as
to the like you know, maybe we have two
different ways to solve a problem, which
one is is more effective. Um we have we
have some intuition, but we haven't done
large-scale studies where we take a
thousand problems and we and we we just
test them. Um
but we can do that now. So, I think
AI-type tools we really will will
actually revolutionize the ex- the
experimental side of math where where um
you don't care so much about uh
individual problems and and the process
of solving them, but you you want to
gather just large-scale data about about
what things work, what things don't. Um
You know, same way that if if you want
to to if you're a software company and
and you want to to roll out a thousand
pieces of software, you know, you don't
really want to handcraft each one and
learn lessons from each. You just want
to find what what are the workflows that
let you scale.
Um so, we we don't yet we we the the
idea of doing mathematics at scale is at
its infancy. Um but that's where AI is
really going to revolutionize the
subject. Interesting.
I feel like a big crux in these
conversations about how much how good AI
will be for science is
I think you said this is like oh they
they're using existing techniques and
modifying them.
And
it would be interesting to understand
how much progress one can make simply
from using existing techniques. Like how
much of if I looked at the top math
journals, how many of them are how many
of the papers are coming up with
whatever coming up with a new technique
means, doing that versus using existing
techniques in
um in new problems and what the overhang
is where if you just applied every known
technique to every open problem, would
that just constitute a humongous uplift
in our civilization's knowledge or would
that not be that impressive and useful?
It's it's this is a great question uh
and I um
we don't have the data to fully answer
it yet.
Um
certainly a lot of work that human
mathematicians do, you know, when you
when you take a new problem, one of the
first things we do is actually we just
find we we look at all the standard
things that have worked on similar
problems in the past and we try them one
by one.
Um and sometimes that works um and
that's still worth publishing sometimes
because the the question was important.
Um sometimes they almost work and you
have to add one more wrinkle um to it
and that's also um
interesting. Um
but then, you know, the papers that go
into the top journals are usually ones
where you you know, the existing methods
can kind of solve you know,
80% of the problem, but then there's
this is 20% which is resistant and and a
new technique has to be invented to to
fill in the gaps. Um
it's it's very very rare now that a
problem gets solved with sort of no
reliance on past solutions where where
all the ideas come out of of of um
of nowhere. Um
you know, that was more common in the
past, but but
math is so mature now that it's it's it
would be it's just so much of a handicap
to to uh to uh to not use the literature
first.
Um
so
yeah, AI tools are really good at
at getting really good at the first part
of that, just trying all the standard
techniques on a problem. Um often now
actually making fewer mistakes in in
finding them than than than humans. So,
they they they still make mistakes, but
but um
um I've I've tested these tools, you
know, on on
on on um like little tasks that I can do
and and sometimes they pick up errors I
make, sometimes I pick up errors that
they make. It's it's about a tie right
now.
Uh um
but um
yeah, I I I haven't yet seen them take
the next step, you know, so so what when
there are holes in in in the argument
where none of the techniques are
working,
to to how then what do you do? Um and
then they can kind of suggest random
things and it it but it it it um
often I find that trying to chase them
down and make them work and find they
don't work, it wastes more time than it
saves. So,
um
now so I
I think some fraction of problems that
we currently think are hard will will
fall from this this method. Um I mean,
especially the ones that haven't
received enough attention. Um
So, like with the Erdős problems, you
know, like
almost all of the 50 problems that were
solved by AIs were ones for which
basically there was no literature. I
mean, Erdős posed the problem once or
twice. Um
I think maybe some people tried it
casually and they they couldn't do it,
but they never wrote up anything. Um
Uh but it turned out that there was a
solution and it was a you know, maybe
combining with this one obscure
technique that that not many people know
about with some other without literature
and that's the kind of love the the
median level of what AIs can accomplish.
And that that's really great. It clears
out 50 of these problems.
So, I think you'll see some isolated
successes.
Um but the six but what we found So,
people have to have done large-scale
sweeps of these Erdős problems. And like
they um
if you only focus on the success
stories, the ones that they get
broadcast on social media, it looks
amazing. You know, like they they
all these problems that haven't been
solved before for decades, now that now
they're falling. Uh but whenever we do a
systematic study, um any given problem,
an AI tool has a success rate of maybe 1
or 2%. Uh it's just that it's just that
they can apply at scale and and you just
pick the winners, it looks great. So, I
think it'll be a similar thing happening
with um
you know, there there are hundreds of of
of really prestigious difficult math
problems out there.
A couple may may um you know, some AI
may get lucky and actually solve them
and there was there was some some back
door to solve the problem that that
everyone else missed. Um and that will
get a lot of publicity. Um But then
people will try these fancy tools on
their own favorite problem and they will
again experience the 1 to 2% success
rate.
>> Right. So, um
there'll be a lot of noise um
amongst the signal of sort of
when they're working, when they're not.
Um
Um we have to do it's it's it's
increasingly increasingly important to
to collect these really standardized
data sets. You know, there are efforts
now to create a standard set of
challenge problems for uh for AIs to
solve. Um and not just rely on the AI
companies to only publish their wins and
and and and not disclose their their
negative results. Um so, that will put
maybe give more clarity as to
where where we're actually at. Also, I
think it's worth emphasizing how much
progress in AI constitutes already to
have models that are capable of
applying some technique that nobody
Yeah. had written down as applicable to
this particular problem. The progress is
simultaneously amazing and
disappointing. It it is it is a very
strange feeling to to to see these tools
in action and and that you know, um but
it also people acclimatize really
quickly. Um
you know, I remember when when when
Google's web search came out 20 years
ago and it just blew all the other all
the searches out of the water. Like you
you just getting relevant hits on the
front page like perfectly almost you
know, exactly what you wanted and it was
amazing and then after a few years you
just took for granted that that you
could just you could just Google
anything.
And yeah, so a a lot of yeah, I mean,
2026-level AI would be stunning in 2021
and a lot of it, you know, face
recognition, natural speech, uh yeah,
doing you know,
doing college-level math problems we
just take for granted now.
>> Yeah. Okay, so speaking of 2026, yeah,
you made a prediction in 2023 that I
think by 2026, what was it that it it
would be like like a colleague in
mathematics or Yeah, a a trustworthy
co-author if used correctly.
Which is looking pretty good in
retrospect. Yeah, I'm I'm I'm pretty
pleased.
>> Yeah.
So, you know, let's let's see if you can
continue this streak.
Um you personally are 2x more productive
as a result of AI.
What year would you say that?
Um yeah, so productivity I think is not
quite a one-dimensional um quantity. Um
like I'm definitely noticing that the
style in which I do mathematics is
changing quite a bit and the type of
things I do.
So, for example, my papers now have a
lot more code, a lot more pictures um
um uh
I because it's so easy to to generate
these things now. So, some plot which
would have taken me hours to do now I
can I can do in minutes.
But in the past I just wouldn't have put
the plot in my paper in the first place.
I would I would just talk about it in
words.
Um so, it's hard to much measure what 2x
means. Um
so
yeah, on the one hand, you know, I I
think the type of papers that I would
write today if I had to do them without
AI assistance, they would definitely
take five times longer, but
but I would not write my papers that
way. 5x? So, Yeah.
But but it's it's because
these are sort of uh auxiliary I mean,
you know, the yeah, so so things that
yeah, things like like um like doing a
much deeper literature search, um
supplying a lot more numerics. Yeah. Um
I mean, they they they they they enrich
the paper. Um
so
yeah, the the the um the core of what I
do, like actually solving um the most
difficult part of of a math problem,
that hasn't changed too much. I still
use pen and paper for that.
But um you know, um there's also there's
also lots of silly things. I I I use um
an AI agent now to to reformat like
sometimes all my parentheses are not
quite the right size. You know, I used
to manually change them by hand and I
can get an AI agent to do all that quite
nicely now in the background.
Um
so, yeah, they they they really sped up
lots of secondary tasks. Uh they haven't
yet sort of uh um sped up the the the
core thing that I do, but it it's
allowed me to sort of add more things to
to to my papers. Um
Yeah, but um by the same token, like if
I were to write a paper I wrote in 2020
again and not add all these extra
features, but just have something of the
same sort of level functionality, yeah,
then that that he doesn't hasn't saved
that that much
uh to be honest.
Uh yeah, so it's it's made papers sort
of richer and broader, but not
necessarily deeper. Mhm.
You made this distinction between
artificial
cleverness and artificial intelligence.
Mhm. And I would like to better
understand those concepts. What is an
example of um
uh
intelligence that is not just
cleverness? Yeah, so um
it's intelligence is famously hard to
define. It's one of these things that
you you kind of know it when you see it.
Um,
but
when I
when I when I talk to someone, um, and
we're trying to collaboratively solve a
math problem together, um,
there's this conversation where, you
know, we neither of us knows how to
solve the problem, um, initially, but,
um,
one of us has some idea and and it looks
promising and and so then then we have
some sort of prototype strategy and then
we test it and then it doesn't work, but
then we we we modify it and there's some
adaptivity and and, um,
and and, uh, continuing improvement of
of of the idea over time.
And eventually, um,
you know, we we sort of we've we've
systematically mapped out what doesn't
work, what does work and and and we can
kind of see a path forward, but it's
evolving with our discussion.
Um,
and this isn't not quite what the AI is
the AI can kind of mimic this a little
bit.
So, to go back to this analogy of of
these jumping robots, you know, so, um,
you know, they can jump and fail and
jump and fail and and jump and fail, but
but what they can't do is that they kind
of they jump a little bit and they they
they reach some handhold with and then,
um, but then they sort of stay there and
then they pull other people up and then,
uh, they try to jump from there. Right.
There isn't this cumulative
process which is, uh, sort of built up
interactively. Um,
it it it seems to be a lot more trial
and error and just repetition, brute
force, um,
you know, which can see it scales and it
can work amazingly well in in certain
contexts, um, but
yeah, this this idea this this sort of
building up cumulatively from, um, from
partial progress is kind of is what's
still not quite there yet. Interesting
you're saying like if Gemini 3 or Claude
4.5 whatever solves the problem Yeah. it
is not the case that its own
understanding of math has progressed or
even if it works on a problem without
solving it, it's not that its own
understanding of
>> Yeah. math has [clears throat]
progressed. Yeah, you you you're on a
new session it's forgotten what what it
just did. Um, it it has you know, it has
no new skills to to attach to to to
build on on on related problems. Um,
maybe what you just did is part of 1
0.001% of the training data for the next
generation, so maybe eventually some of
it gets absorbed, but yeah.
So, Terence talks about the importance
of decomposing particularly gnarly
problems into a series of easier chunks,
even if this doesn't result in the full
solution. Approaching problems in this
way helps you build up the intuitions
and practice the techniques that you'll
need to keep making progress. But models
today tend to struggle with these kinds
of problem-solving techniques. That's
where Labelbox comes in. Labelbox helps
you train models, not just to get the
right answer, but to think the right
way. They've operationalized these
reasoning behaviors into rubrics, giving
you the ability to evaluate every
important dimension of a model's output.
These rubrics go beyond simple
correctness. Did the model reach for the
right tools? Did it check its own work
and explore alternative paths? How clear
was its response? These skills are
useful across domains, math, physics,
finance, psychology, and more. And
they're becoming increasingly important
as models take on harder open-ended
problems, some of which have multiple
solutions and some of which we don't
even know the solutions to. Labelbox can
give you rubrics tailored to your
domain, helping you systematically
measure and shape how your models think.
Learn more at labelbox.com/turingcast.
One big question I have is how plausible
is it that if we just keep training AIs
to get better and better at,
you know, solving problems in Lean, that
they will continue to solve more and
more impressive problems and then we
will in retrospect be surprised at how
little insight
we got from some Lean solution to
proving the Riemann hypothesis or
something. Or do you think it is a
necessary condition of solving the
Riemann hypothesis is even by an AI that
is like totally doing it in Lean that
the constructions which are made, the
definitions which are created, even in
the the Lean program,
have to advance our understanding of
mathematics or do you think it could
just be assembly code gobbledygook? Oh,
yeah, we don't know. I mean, some
problems have been basically solved by
pure brute force. The four color theorem
is is a famous example. Um, we have
still not found a conceptually elegant
proof of this theorem. Um, it it
basically
and and maybe we never will. I mean,
some problems may only be solvable by
just splitting into some enormous number
of cases and and doing brute force
unintelligible computer analysis on on
each case.
I mean, part of the reason
we we prize problems like the Riemann
hypothesis is that we're pretty sure
that
that something amazing has to
a new type of mathematics has to be
created or a new connection between two
previously unconnected areas of
mathematics has to be
discovered to to make this work. We we
don't even know what the shape of the
solution
is, but
it doesn't feel like a problem that will
be solved just by exhaustively checking
cases or something. Um, I mean, it could
be false actually. Actually, so
we could actually uh, okay, there is an
unlikely scenario that that the
hypothesis is false and that's just this
this this you just compute oh, here's a
zero off off the line and a massive
computer calculation verifies it. That'd
be very disappointing. Um,
I don't know. I I I I do feel that, you
know, fully autonomous one-shot
approaches are
not the right approach for these
problems. I mean, I I think you you'll
get a lot more mileage out of the
interplay between between humans
collaborating with these tools. Um,
and, uh,
I can see one of these problems being
solved by by
some, uh,
smart humans as assisted by some
extremely
powerful AI tools, but the exact dynamic
may be very different from what we
envision right now. I mean, it it it
could be a collaborative collaboration
of a type that we just doesn't exist
yet. Um,
yeah, I mean, we there may be a way to
to generate, you know, a million
variants of the Riemann zeta function
and do some data analysis AI assisted
data analysis and we we we discover some
pattern between connecting them which
which we didn't know about before and we
then this lets you transform the problem
into into a different area of
mathematics. I mean, there could be all
kinds of
of scenarios. So, suppose
the AI figures it out and latent in the
Lean Mhm. is some
brand new construction which, you know,
if we realize its significance would
Mhm. we would be able to apply it in all
these different situations.
How How do you even recognize it, right?
Like if,
you know, you just
again, I have a very naive question, but
you if you if you come up with the
equivalent of like Descartes comes with
this idea, oh, you can have this
coordinate system where you can unify
algebra and geometry, but in Lean code
it would just look like R to R and it
wouldn't look that significant or
something or similarly I'm sure there's
other constructions which have this kind
of property. Well, the beauty of
formalizing a proof in something like
Lean is that you can take any piece of
it and study it atomically. Um, so,
um,
you know, so, when I read a paper with
my humans, uh, with which solves some
some difficult problem, you know,
there's often some big sequence of
lemmas and theorems and things and and
so
ideally the author would talk us talk
their way through, you know, what's
important, what's not, but but sometimes
they don't reveal what what, um, what
steps were the important ones and which
ones were just kind of boilerplate, um,
standard, um, steps. But you can study
each lemma in isolation and some of them
I can see, oh, this looks very standard.
This this this resembles something I'm
I'm familiar with. I'm pretty sure, um,
there's nothing interesting going on
here. But this lemma, oh, that's that's
something I haven't seen before and I
could see why if you could if you had
this result, that would really help
prove the main result. Like you could
you know, you can assess whether
something's up, uh, um,
are really sort of key to your, um,
uh, to to your argument or not. And Lean
really facilitates that, you know, you
can you can you can you can do you know,
the individual steps are I don't know,
really precisely. Um, I think in the
future there'll be, um, you know,
there'll there'll be entire professions
of of mathematicians who might take a
giant, um,
Lean generated proof and maybe, you
know, do some ablation on it or
something and try to remove steps of
parts of it and,
um, and should try to find it find more
elegant ways, you know, maybe some other
AIs just sort of do some reinforcement
learning. How can you make the proof
more elegant and and and, uh, um, maybe
other AIs will grade whether this is
this proof looks better or not. Um,
um,
one thing that will change quite a bit,
uh, in the near future is is that until
recently writing papers was the most
time-consuming and expensive part, um,
of, uh, of the job. I mean, so you you
you did it very rarely, you know,
you you only wrote up your results once
everything was all the other parts of
your argument were, um, were checked out
and things cuz it just rewriting it
again, refactoring was just a total
pain. But that's one thing that's become
a lot easier now with modern AI tools,
so, you know, you don't have to have
just one version of of your paper. You
you know, you can once you have one, you
know, people can generate hundreds more.
Um, so, yeah, one giant messy Lean proof
may not be very, um, uh, meaningful or,
um, understandable on its own, but but
other people can can can refactor it and
do all kinds of of of of of of of things
with them. Um,
we have seen it with the Erdős problem
website, you know, that people will will
an AI will generate a proof and then
here was 3,000 lines of code that that
verified the proof, but then we people
got other AIs to summarize the proof and
and and they will write their own
proofs. Um, there's actually, um,
um, post-processing once you actually
have one proof, um, we actually have a
lot of tools now to to deconstruct it
and and interpret it. It's a very
nascent area of of of
of science or or mathematics, but, um,
I'm not as worried about, um, yeah, so
so so some people are concerned, you
know, what if the Riemann hypothesis is
proved with a completely
incomprehensible proof? I I think once
you have the artifact of a proof, we can
do a lot of of of of of analysis on it.
Mhm.
You
posted recently that it would be helpful
to have a formal or semi-formal language
for mathematical strategies as opposed
to just mathematical proofs, which is
what Lean specializes in. I would love
to learn more about what that would
involve or look like. Um we don't really
know. Um I mean we've been very lucky in
mathematics that that we have worked out
the laws of of logic and mathematics,
but this is actually fairly recent
accomplishment. I mean it was started by
Euclid um you know
millennia ago, but but only in like the
early 20th century did we finally this
talk here the actions of of mathematics
or what the standard actions of what we
call ZFC and actions of first order
logic and this is what a proof is and
and and this we've managed to automate
and and have a formal language for.
Um but there could be some way to assess
plausibility of certain
um you know so you have a conjecture
that something is true.
Um you you you test a few examples uh
and it works out. Like how does this
increase your your your confidence that
the conjecture is true?
We have a few sort of mathematical ways
to to to model this Bayesian probability
for example um
but they're not
but they often they're often you have to
set certain base assumptions and and and
it's it's it's there's a lot of
subjectivity still
in in in um in these tasks. So it it is
it's it's not clear um
I I mean it's this is more of a wish
than um than a than than a plan to to
develop these languages, but
just seeing how successful having a
formal framework in place like Lean has
made deductive proofs so much
um
easier to automate and and train AI on.
If there was some similar framework and
so the the bottom neck for using AI to
to to create strategies and and and make
conjectures is we have to rely on human
experts to
and the test of time to to validate
whether something's plausible or not. If
there was some semi-formal framework
where this could be done
semi-automatically in a way that that uh
um isn't sort of easily hackable um to
you know so of course the the uh it's
really important with these formal proof
assistants that that that there are just
no um
uh there there's no backdoors or
exploits that that you can do to somehow
get your your certified proof without
actually proving it because
reinforcement learning is so so good at
finding these these
these backdoors.
Um
but um
yeah if if it's some framework that sort
of mimics how
scientists talk to each other in a
semi-formal way to you know using data
and argument but also um
you know constructing narratives and and
and and
there's some
there's some subjective aspect of
science
that we don't know how to capture in a
way that that that we can insert AI into
them in any useful way.
Interesting.
So yeah this is a this is a future
problem.
I mean there are research efforts to you
know to try to create automated
conjectures and and and and
and maybe there are ways to benchmark
these and and get some
some way to simulate this, but this is
it's all very very new science. Can can
you help me get some intuition for
I have two sub questions.
One, it would be very helpful to have a
tangible sense of
It would be helpful to have a specific
example of
what
something like this would look like that
the way scientists communicate that we
can't formalize yet. And two, it seems
almost definitionally paradoxical to say
here
building up some narrative or building
up some natural language explanation and
then also having something which you
could have formalized and I'm sure
there's some intuition behind
where that overlap is and I'd love to
understand that better.
All right so so an example of of a
conjecture. So um Gauss um was
interested in the prime numbers and he
computed he created one of the first
mathematical data sets. He just computed
the first 100,000 prime numbers or so um
hoping to find patterns.
Um
and he did find a pattern, but maybe not
not the pattern he was expecting. He he
found a statistical pattern in the
primes that if you count how many primes
there are up to 100, 1,000 um
um
1 million and so forth they get sparser
and sparser, but the the the the drop
off in in in the density was inversely
proportional to the natural logarithm of
of of of of of of the range of numbers.
So he conjectured what we now call the
prime number theorem. Um the number of
primes up to X is like X divided by the
natural log of X.
Um and he had no way to prove this. Um
It was it was data-driven. Um
So this this was a a conjecture. Um
It was revolutionary for its time
because um it was maybe the first
really important conjecture of of
mathematics statistical nature. You know
so normally you you talk about pattern
like maybe the spacing between the
primes has a certain regularity or
something, but um yeah but this was
really something which it didn't tell
you exactly how many primes there were
in any given range. It just gave you an
approximate approximation that got
better and better as you um uh went
further and further out.
But it um
it it helped or so it it it it started
the field of what we call analytic
number theory.
Um
but it was the first in many conjectures
like this many of which got proved which
sort of started um
um consolidating the idea that the prime
numbers actually didn't really have a
pattern that they behave like random um
uh
random sets of numbers with a certain
density.
Um I mean they had some patterns like
like they they almost all odd. Okay so
there's there's
um and then they're not actually random.
They're what's called pseudo random. I
mean there
um there's no random number generation
involved in creating the prime numbers.
But um
over time it became more and more
productive to think of the primes as as
if they were just generated by some some
some god rolling dice all the time and
just creating this this random set. Um
and this allowed us to make all these
other predictions. Um so there's a still
open conjecture in in in number theory
called the the twin prime conjecture
that there should be infinitely many
pairs of primes that are twins distance
two apart like 11 and 13.
We can't prove that and there's actually
good reasons why we can't prove it, but
um
uh but because of this statistical
random model of the primes we are
absolutely convinced this is true. Uh
we know that if if the primes were sort
of generated by flipping coins or
something that we would just by random
chance just like infinite monkeys at a
typewriter we would see um twin primes
appear over and over again.
Um
and we have over time developed this
very accurate conceptual model of what
the primes should behave like based on
statistics and probability
um but it's all mostly heuristic and
non-rigorous um but extremely accurate.
Um
so the few times where we actually can
prove things about the primes that has
matched up with the predictions of this
what we call the random model of the
primes. So we we we have this
conjectural concept framework for
understanding the primes that we
we everyone believes in and you know
it's the same reason why we we believe
the Riemann hypothesis is true why we
believe that cryptography based on the
primes is basically is mathematically
secure and stuff like that. It's
it's all part of this this this this
belief.
Um
In fact one reason why we care about the
Riemann hypothesis is that if the
Riemann hypothesis failed um we we knew
it was false it means it would it would
be a serious blow to this model that
that this it would mean there's a secret
pattern to the primes that we were not
aware of.
Um and uh I think we would very rapidly
abandon any cryptography based on the
primes because if there was a one
pattern that we didn't know about
there's probably more. And these
patterns can lead to exploits in in
crypto and yeah it's it's going to be
uh it would be a big big shock. Um so we
really want to make sure that doesn't
happen.
Um
so yeah it's it's um
so we've been convinced of of things
like the Riemann hypothesis and things
over time, but uh
some of it is experimental evidence some
is the few times we've been able to make
theoretical results that always aligned.
Um you know it is possible that the
consensus is wrong and and or just
missed something very basic. Um you know
there have been paradigm shifts in the
past in scientific history.
Um
yeah but we we don't really have a way
of measuring this. Um
I think partly because we don't have
enough data on on on how math or science
develops. We we have one timeline of
history and you know we we have like you
know 100 stories of turning points in
history. If if if we had access to a
million alien civilizations that each of
the the different development of of
history and and science in different
orders then maybe we would actually have
a have a have a decent shot shot at that
at a
at understanding of how do we measure
what is
progress and and and what is a good
strategy and we could maybe start
formalizing it and and actually having a
framework.
Maybe if
what we need to do is actually start
creating lots of mini universes or
simulations of of AI solving very basic
problems you know in arithmetic or
whatever, but but um um but coming up
with their own strategies for doing
these things and and and having these
little laboratories to test. I mean
there are people who
who investigate like trying to what's
the smallest
you know neural network that can do
tentative application and stuff like
that. I think I think we could actually
learn a lot just from
from evolving um
small AIs on on on on simple problems.
We could learn a lot.
I was super excited when Mercury reached
out about sponsoring the podcast because
I've been banking with them for years. I
think I opened my first account with
them in 2023. Something I've come to
appreciate over the last few years is
that Mercury is constantly updating
things and adding new features. Take
their newest feature Insights. Insights
summarizes your money in and out showing
you your biggest transactions and
calling out anything that deserves extra
attention. Like maybe your revenue from
a particular partner has gone down or
you've got a big uncategorized purchase
that needs to be investigated. It's a
super low friction way for me to keep
tabs on my business and make quick
decisions. For example, I try to invest
any cash that I don't need on hand to
keep running the business. With Insights
with just a couple of clicks I was able
to see exactly how much money I spent in
each month of 2025. And that lets me
know exactly how much cash I'll need for
the next year or so of operations. And
then I can go invest the rest. Mercury
just keeps adding new features like
this. Go to mercury.com to check it out.
Mercury is a fintech company, not an
FDIC-insured bank. Banking services
provided through Choice Financial Group
and Column N.A. members FDIC.
You have to learn about new fields, not
only very rapidly, but deeply enough to
contribute to the frontier.
So, in some sense, you're
also one of the world's
greatest autodidacts. What How does What
is your process of learning about a new
subfield in math? What does that look
like? Yeah. So,
I certainly identify with kind of the
Yeah, as we talked about depth and
breadth before. And it's it's not purely
human AI distinction. I mean, humans
also
um split So, it's I think it was Irving
split them into hedgehogs and foxes. And
the hedgehog knows one thing very very
well, and a fox knows a
little bit about everything. Uh so, I
definitely I don't you know, I I I think
of myself as a fox. Um
You know, I mean, I I I work with
hedgehogs a lot, and sometimes I can be
a hedgehog if need be, but um
Yeah, so um
I I've always had a little bit of an
obsessive streak. If if there's
something which
I read about which I feel like I should
understand I I I I have the capability
to understand this, but I don't
understand why it works as there's some
magic in it that um you know, so someone
was able to use a a type of mathematics
I'm not I'm not familiar with and get
that which I would like to prove, and I
can't do it by myself, but they could do
it by by their method, then I want to
find out what was their trick. Um
It bugs me that they someone else can
can do something which I think I I can
do, but but I can't. Um so, I've always
had that kind of obsessive completionist
type type streak. Um
I've had to wean myself off computer
games because um
I
I I'm I start a game, I want to play it
to completion, solve all the levels, and
yeah.
Um
So, um
that's one one way in which I I learn
new fields. Um
I collaborate with a lot of people who
have taught me other types of
mathematics. Um I just make friends with
I love a mathematician who's working on
another area of mathematics, and I find
their problems interesting, but I need
to but they have to teach me
um some of the basic tricks and and
what's known and what's not known, and I
learn a lot from that.
Um
I found that that writing about my
what I've learned in I have a blog where
I sometimes um
um
uh record things that I've learned cuz
in the past, when I was younger, I would
learn something and do a score trick and
say, "Okay, I'm going to remember this."
And then 6 months later, I
I've forgotten. I I remember remembering
it, but I don't
but I can't reconstruct my arguments.
And it The first few times it was so
frustrating to
have understood something and then lost
it. Um I sort of resolved I should
always write down
anything cool that I've learned. Um
And that's this is part of why how this
blog came about. Um How long does it
take you to write a blog post? Um
It's something I often do when I don't
want to do other work. You know, like
like there's some referee report or
something. There's there's there's
there's there's something that that
feels slightly unpleasant for me to do
at the time. And so,
writing a blog it feels creative and
fun. Like it's something that I I do for
myself. Um
So, maybe depending on on the topic, it
could be a quick, you know, half an hour
or several hours, but I
um It doesn't
because it's something that I do sort of
voluntarily, it doesn't feel like it it
it it doesn't feel
uh
the time flies when I when I write these
things as as opposed to sort of doing
something which I have to do for
administrative reasons, but it's just
that it's it's it's drudgery. Okay,
those are tasks where the AI is really
helping with nowadays, actually.
>> Is it um if if like civilization could
could from first principles decide how
to use Terry Tao's time?
>> [laughter]
>> You know, it's like a limited resource.
Uh
how how how What What is the biggest
diff between
in a if the veil of ignorance got to
decide how to use Terry Tao's time
versus what it does now? Um
Okay, so
>> This podcast wouldn't be happening.
Yeah, so the
as much as I complain about certain
tasks that I don't want to do, but I
have to do. So,
as you get more senior in in academia,
you get more more responsibilities. Like
it's more committees and and and
whatever.
Um
But
I have also found that
um a lot of events that I kind of
reluctantly went to because I was
obliged to for one reason or another. Um
Because this is outside of my comfort
zone, I often
find interactions with people who I
wouldn't normally talk to. Like you, for
instance. Um
And I would I would learn interesting
things and have interesting experiences.
Um and
I would I would have opportunities to to
to to then network with other people
that I would never
have have done before. Um
So, I do believe a lot in serendipity.
Um I mean, I I do optimize my time
in in in when I
So, there's some portions of of my of a
day where I do schedule very carefully.
Um but I I have been willing to sort of
leave some some portions just, "Okay,
I'm going to do something which is which
is not my usual thing, and then maybe
it'll be a waste of my time, but maybe
I'll I'll learn something."
And and more often than not, it it's
I've I've
I feel like I've I've gotten a positive
experience, which is not something I
would have planned for. Um
And yeah, so I believe a lot in
serendipity. Um
And maybe there's a danger actually that
you know, in the mo- modern society,
it's not just AI, but we've become
really good at optimizing everything. Um
And and and maybe we are optimizing
we're not optimizing out of
optimization.
Um that uh
you know, with with with COVID, for
example,
we we switched like we we switched a lot
to remote meetings. Um and so,
everything was scheduled now. And so,
we kept busy at least
in academia, you know, we we met almost
the same number of people that we met
in person, but everything had to be
planned. Um You had to schedule things
in advance. And what we lost out on was
sort of the the casual like, you know,
knocking on a hallway, just meeting
someone for you know, walking getting
coffee. Um And there's the the the
there's the the the there's um
yeah, serendipitous interactions that uh
um
you might think are not optimal, but
actually are really important.
You know, when I was a grad student, um
I would go down to the library um to
look I had to look for a journal
article. You had to physically go to the
library, check out the the journal, and
read your article. And sometimes the
next article, you know, you can just
browse through, and then the next
article is also interesting. Um
sometimes it wasn't, but but you could
accidentally find interesting things. Um
Which is something which has basically
been lost now because you can just type
in if you if you want to access an
article now, you just type it into to a
search engine or even an AI, and you can
get instantly what you want, but you
don't get so the accidental things that
you you might have have um gotten if
you'd done it more inefficiently. Um
So,
um
Yeah, there've been times when I mean,
I I spent a year once at the Institute
for Advanced Study, which is uh a great
place to uh you know, there's no
distractions. You you you're there to
just do research. And like the first few
weeks you're there, like it's great.
You're getting all these papers written
up that you've been wanting to do for a
long time. You've been thinking about
problems for blocks of hours of a time.
Um but I find if I stay there for more
than a
several months, like I
I run out of of inspiration somehow.
Like I get bored. I just, you know, surf
the internet a lot more. Um You actually
do need a certain level of distraction
in your life. It it somehow
uh
adds enough randomness
um and and that
and temperature high temperature you
need. Yeah, um
So, yeah, I don't know the the optimal
way to schedule my life. Uh it just
seems to work.
I'm very curious when you expect AIs
that can like actually do
frontier math better than the at least
as good as well as the the best human
mathematicians.
>> I mean, in in some ways they're already
they're already doing frontier math that
is super intelligent that humans can't
do, but it's a different frontier from
what we're used to.
Um I mean, you could argue that
calculate is already doing frontier math
that that humans
could not accomplish, but it was but it
wasn't you know, number crunching.
But um But but replacing Terry Tao
completely.
Yeah, I mean,
what What do you want me for? I um
You'll just go on another podcast after.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm not sure we've
It might not be the right question to
ask. Um
I think with within a decade, a lot of
things that mathematicians currently do
um
we we spend a lot of the bulk of our
time doing and a lot of stuff we put in
our papers today can be done by AI.
Um
but we will find that that actually
wasn't the most important part of what
we do. Um
You know, um 100 years ago, um
a lot of mathematicians were just
solving differential equations. Like
people needed
physicists needed some exact solution to
to to to to to some system. And they
would just
they hired a mathematician to
laboriously go through the calculus and
and work out the solution to this fluid
equation or whatever. Um a lot of what
um uh
19th century mathematician would do, um
you could make a call to Mathematica or
Wolfram Alpha or a computer algebra
package or now more recently an AI, and
it would just solve the problem in a few
minutes.
Um but we we moved on. We
we we worked on different types of
problems after that. Um
You know, once computers came along, you
know, the
computers used to be human. Like people
used to laboriously create log tables
and and and and and work out primes as
Gauss did. And that has all been
outsourced to computers. Um but but we
we moved on. Um
In genetics, you know, to to to sequence
at the the genome of a single organism,
that was an entire PhD of a geneticist.
You know, it's so carefully, you know,
separating all the chromosomes and and
and whatever. Um and now you can just
spend $1,000 and send it to a sequencer
and and and get it done. But genetics is
not dead as a subject. Uh you you move
to different scale. You know, maybe you
study whole ecosystems rather than
individuals.
I I I take your point, but on the
question of well, when is most
mathematical progress or almost all
mathematical progress happening by AI?
So, if you find out oh, this year a
millennium prize problem has been
solved, you'd put, you know, a 95% odds
that an AI did it autonomously.
Surely there will be such a year.
Um
I guess. I mean, I I I I do believe that
that hybrid um
human plus AIs will will dominate
mathematics for a lot longer. It it's It
will depend It will require some
additional breakthroughs
uh beyond what we already have. Um so,
it's it's going to be stochastic. Um you
know, I think, you know, AIs currently
are very good at certain things, but
they're really terrible at others. Um
and and while you can sort of add more
and more frameworks on top to kind of
reduce the error rates and and and and
make them uh
work with each other a bit more and so
forth. Um I I
um it feels like we are we don't have
all the uh the ingredients to like
really have a
truly satisfactory sort of uh
replacement for all intellectual tasks.
Um it's it is complementary currently.
Um it's not not uh
um it it is is not a replacement. Um
But maybe the uh
I mean,
because currently what AIs will
accelerate science in so many ways,
uh hopefully, you know, I mean, it new
discoveries, new breakthroughs will
happen um more
uh more quickly. I mean, um it's
possible that also by somehow destroying
serendipity, we we actually inhibit
certain types of progress. Um
Anything is possible really at this
point. I think uh this uh this the world
is very very unpredictable at this this
point in time. What is your advice to
somebody who would consider a career in
math or is early in a career in math,
g-
especially in light of AI progress. How
should they be thinking about their
career differently if at all as a result
of the AI progress? Yeah, so uh we live
in a time of change. Um it is as I said,
uh it it we live in a particularly
unpredictable era. Um
and uh
I think in time like
things that we've taken for granted for
centuries may not hold anymore. Um so,
um yeah, the way we
uh
do everything, and not just mathematics,
um
will change. And um
you know, so I I think uh which is, you
know, I mean, in many ways I would
prefer the much more boring quiet era
where things are much the same as they
were 10 years ago, 20 years ago.
But um
so, I think one just has to
embrace this that there's we're there's
going to be a lot of change. Um
and that um
you know, the things that you study,
some of them may become obsolete or
revolutionized.
But but some things will be retained. Um
and
um so, you you you somehow always have
to keep an eye on you know, like you um
there'll be a lot of
opportunities for for things that you
you wouldn't be able to do before. Um
So, you
I mean, in in math, you know, you
previously had to basically go through
years and years of education in math PhD
before you could contribute to the
frontier of of math research.
Um but now it's quite possible at the
high school level or or whatever that
that you could get involved in math
project and actually make a real
contribution because of all these AI
tools and and and Lean and everything
else.
Um
so, there'll be a lot of non-traditional
opportunities to to learn.
Um so, you need a very adaptable
um mindset. Um
Yeah.
There'll be there'll be pursuing things
just for curiosity and for playing
playing around and uh I mean, you still
need to get your credentials for I mean,
for that I would think that for a while
it's still be important to to sort of
still go through traditional education
and and uh and and learn
math and science and so forth the
old-fashioned way for a while. But um
yeah, um but you should also be open to
to very very different ways of of of
doing science, some of which don't exist
yet. Um
Yeah, so it's it's it's a scary time,
but also very exciting. Yeah.
Awesome. That's a great note to close
on. Terence, thanks so much. Yeah,
thanks. My pleasure.